# HPRC Data Explorer Catalog Files

## Overview of Catalog-Building Process

The HPRC Data Explorer catalog data is supplied via spreadsheets hosted on GitHub and Google Sheets, and is transformed by manually-run scripts into JSON that can be used by the Data Explorer app to display catalog content. The scripts used to build the catalog are split into two steps: first, Python scripts are used to download the input files, process them, and combine them into one CSV file for each entity type (samples, sequencing data, assemblies, and annotations); then, a TypeScript script is used to transform the CSVs into JSON files for use by the app. The different entity types are kept separate for the Python step, but may be combined in the TypeScript step, e.g. to associate samples' metadata with related entities.

Alignments are a special case in that they are not handled by the Python build step, and instead have a manually-maintained CSV as input for the TypeScript build step.

The input files for each entity type are validated using LinkML schemas; this is done automatically during the Python step.

## Directory Structure

- `catalog` - This directory, containing the data and scripts used to define the Data Explorer's content.
  - `build` - Scripts used to build the catalog data, as well as intermediate data involved in the build process.
    - `intermediate` - Files to be transformed into the final JSON representation by the TypeScript build step, largely having been generated by the Python build step; the exception is `alignments.csv`, which is not generated and must be manually maintained.
    - `py` - Python scripts used to perform the initial build step of assembling catalog data from input files.
    - `temporary` - Temporary downloaded input files that are ignored by Git.
    - `ts` - TypeScript scripts used to perform the second, final catalog build step of transforming assembled catalog data for each entity type into JSON files to be used by the Data Explorer.
  - `output` - Output catalog files, used directly by the Data Explorer.
  - `schema` - LinkML schemas for catalog entities, and related files.
    - `generated` - Definitions, such as TypeScript types, generated from the schemas. Note that generated Python definitions are instead placed in `catalog/build/py` to enable them to be straightforwardly imported by the Python scripts.
    - `scripts` - Scripts used to interact with the schemas, namely by generating definitions from them.

## Building the Intermediate Catalog Files

The intermediate composite files for samples, raw sequencing data, assemblies, and annotations are generated through Python scripts.

See [README.md](../README.md) in the repository root for instructions on setting up the Python environment.

Once the Python environment has been installed, all of the script-generated intermediate files can be built by running:

```shell
npm run build-catalog-source
```

This will also validate all entity types (including alignments), with any validation errors being printed to the console.

As the scripts can take a long time to run (due to file sizes being queried from Amazon S3), it may be desirable to build or validate only a single entity type that has been updated, which can be done using the corresponding one of the following commands:

```shell
npm run build-samples-source
npm run build-sequencing-data-source
npm run build-assemblies-source
npm run build-annotations-source
npm run validate-alignments
```

## Building the Catalog Files

Once the intermediate files are generated, you can build the catalog output files with:

```shell
npm run build-catalog
```

This will make the updated catalog data available to the app. The updated catalog files must be committed and then merged into `main` on GitHub in order to allow the app to be deployed with the new data.
